---
title: Spider
date: 2026-02-26
...

There is a spider web in the corner of my shower, above and
to the right of the showerhead. Along it's longest axis, it
measures a couple feet. It has gotten out of hand.

I leave the window open to help keep my bathroom dry and
odorless. Unfortunately, this window lacks a screen. During
early winter, I noticed a small web in the corner of my
shower, and in it's center lay a small, bulbous spider.
I was instantly charmed. His web was tucked away in the
corner by the roof, on the same wall housing the bathroom
window. I decided to let him stay.

I never saw him move. He was either in the center of his
web, or hidden somewhere else. A hand full of times I looked
around trying to find where he went, but never succeeded.
Whether he was present or absent, the evidence of his work
was clear. A graveyard of insect parts lay beneath the web
on the windowsill. Arms, heads, wings, and other bits.

His morbid grime felt correct. It was a reflection of who
I was, and furthermore, who I was meant to be. I decided
that his direction must be my own. It was less of a self
acceptance, and more of a blind self declaration; a lack of
imagination.

Eventually his web grew and began to limit my showering
space. He hadn't encroached much, but like the physical, my
mental space was being occupied. As I cleaned my bathroom,
I cleaned around him. All other filth was kept at bay, but
his corner was his empire. The weeks advanced, the insect
bodies piled up, and his place in my life was further
entrenched.

I met a woman at a mutual friend's birthday. She had calm
eyes and asked me to reach out to her later. We had dinner
a handful of times, and with each encounter a new pressure
grew: I had to do something about the spider. No one had
seen the corners of my room and I needed to acknowledge that
most wouldn't like it.

Sure, I could find a confidant who would accept the spider,
maybe even cherish it, but was this necessary? Why was I so
attached to this spider? Why did things need to be this way?

I came home one afternoon and gently removed the spider from
his way, placing him outside. I then destroyed his empire,
the network of silk, dead bodies, and all. Familiarity had
bread my sympathies, but this spider didn't care for me. He
would probably prefer I wasn't around. By moving him out,
I was making space for someone who could care.

Out with the old, in with the new.
