posts/fql.md, before:

---
title: FQL
...

```lang-fql
/user/index/surname("Johnson",<userID:int>)
/user(:userID,...)
->
/user(9323,"Timothy","Johnson",37)=nil
/user(24335,"Andrew","Johnson",23)=nil
/user(33423,"Ryan","Johnson",54)=nil
```

FQL is a query language for [Foundation
DB](https://www.foundationdb.org/). FQL aims to make FDB's
semantics feel natural and intuitive. Common patterns can be
modeled using FQL. Index indirection and multi-transaction
range reads are first class citizens.

> FQL is a work in-progress. The features mentioned in this
> document are not all implemented. Unimplemented features
> will be marked as such with a callout like this one.

## Introduction

FQL queries look like key-values. They have a key (directory
and tuple), followed by a `=`, and a value. FQL can only
access keys encoded using the directory & tuple
[layers](https://apple.github.io/foundationdb/layer-concept.html).

```lang-fql
/my/directory("my","tuple")=4000
```

FQL queries may define a single key-value to be written, as
shown above, or may define a set of key-values to be read,
as shown below.

```lang-fql
/my/directory("my","tuple")=<>
->
/my/directory("my","tuple")=0x0fa0
```

> `->` is not part of the FQL syntax. It's only used by this
> document to separate a read query from it's exemplary
> results.

The query above has a variable `<>` as it's value. Variables
act as placeholders for any of the supported [data
elements](#data-elements). This query will return a single
key-value from the database, if such a key exists.

FQL queries can also perform range reads by including
a variable in the key's tuple. The query below will return
all key-values which conform to the schema defined by the
query. 

```lang-fql
/my/directory(<>,"tuple")=nil
->
/my/directory("your","tuple")=nil
/my/directory(42,"tuple")=nil
```

All key-values with a certain key prefix can be range read
by ending the key's tuple with `...`.

```lang-fql
/my/directory("my","tuple",...)=<>
->
/my/directory("my","tuple")=0x0fa0
/my/directory("my","tuple",47.3)=0x8f3a
/my/directory("my","tuple",false,0xff9a853c12)=nil
```

A query's value may be omitted to imply a variable, meaning
the following query is semantically identical to the one
above.

```lang-fql
/my/directory("my","tuple",...)
->
/my/directory("my","tuple")=0x0fa0
/my/directory("my","tuple",47.3)=0x8f3a
/my/directory("my","tuple",false,0xff9a853c12)=nil
```

Including a variable in the directory tells FQL to perform
the read on all directory paths matching the schema.

```lang-fql
/<>/directory("my","tuple")
->
/my/directory("my","tuple")=0x0fa0
/your/directory("my","tuple")=nil
```

## Grammar

As stated in the [introduction](#Introduction), FQL queries
are a textual representation of a specific key-value or
a schema describing the structure of many key-values. 

> FQL is a context-free language with a formal
> [definition](https://github.com/janderland/fdbq/blob/main/syntax.ebnf).

### Key-Values

FQL queries are structured like key-values and are written
as a [directory](#Directory), [tuple](#Tuple), `=`, and
value appended together.

```lang-fql
/app/data("server A",0)=0xabcf03
```

The value following the `=` may be any of the [data
elements](#data-elements) or a variable.

```lang-fql
/region/north_america(22.3,-8)=("rain","fog")
```

The value may also be the `clear` token.

```lang-fql
/some/where("home","town",88.3)=clear
```

### Directories

A directory is specified as a sequence of strings, each
prefixed by a forward slash:

```lang-fql
/my/dir/path_way
```

The strings of the directory do not need quotes if they only
contain alphanumericals, underscores, dashes, or periods. To
use other symbols, the strings must be quoted:

```
/my/"dir@--o/"/path_way
```

The quote character may be backslash escaped:

```
/my/"\"dir\""/path_way
```

### Tuples

A tuple is specified as a sequence of elements, separated by
commas, wrapped in a pair of curly braces. It may contain
a tuple or any of the data elements.

```lang-fql
("one",2,0x03,("subtuple"),5825d3f8-de5b-40c6-ac32-47ea8b98f7b4)
```

The last element of a tuple may be the `...` token.

```lang-fql
(0xff,"thing",...)
```

Any combination of spaces, tabs, and newlines are allowed
after the opening brace and commas. Trailing commas are
allowed.

```lang-fql
(
  1,
  2,
  3,
)
```

### Data Elements

In a FQL query, the directory, tuples, and value contain
instances of data elements. FQL utilizes the same types of
elements as the [tuple
layer](https://github.com/apple/foundationdb/blob/main/design/tuple.md).
Example instances of these types can be seen below.

| Type     | Example                                |
|:---------|:---------------------------------------|
| `nil`    | `nil`                                  |
| `int`    | `-14`                                  |
| `uint`   | `7`                                    |
| `bool`   | `true`                                 |
| `float`  | `33.4`                                 |
| `bigint` | `#35299340192843523485929848293291842` |
| `string` | `"string"`                             |
| `bytes`  | `0xa2bff2438312aac032`                 |
| `uuid`   | `5a5ebefd-2193-47e2-8def-f464fc698e31` |
| `tuple`  | `("hello",27.4,nil)`                   |

> `bigint` support is not yet implemented.

### Variables

Any [data element](#data-elements) may be replaced with
a variable. Variables are specified as a list of data types,
separated by `|`, wrapped in `<` & `>`.

```lang-fql
<uint|string|uuid|bytes>
```

A variable may be empty, including no data types.

```lang-fql
<>
```

## Semantics

Queries have the ability to write a key-value, read one or
more key-values, and list directories.

Queries without any variables result in a single key-value
being written. You can think of these queries as explicitly
defining a single key-value.

Queries with variables or `...` result in zero or more
key-values being read. You can think of these queries as
defining a set of possible key-values stored in the DB.

You can further limit the set of key-values read by
including a type constraint in the variable.

> Queries lacking a value section imply a variable in said
> section and therefore do not result in a write operation.

### Data Encoding

The directory and tuple layers are responsible for 
encoding the data elements in the key section. As for the 
value section, FDB doesn't provide a standard encoding.

The table below outlines how data elements are encoded 
when present in the value section.

| Type     | Encoding                        |
|:---------|:--------------------------------|
| `nil`    | empty value                     |
| `int`    | 64-bit, 1's compliment          |
| `uint`   | 64-bit                          |
| `bool`   | single byte, `0x00` means false |
| `float`  | IEEE 754                        |
| `bigint` | not implemented yet             |
| `string` | ASCII                           |
| `bytes`  | as provided                     |
| `uuid`   | RFC 4122                        |
| `tuple`  | tuple layer                     |

## Index Indirection

TODO: Finish section.

```lang-fql
/user/index/surname("Johnson",<userID:int>)
/user/entry(:userID,...)
```

## Transaction Boundaries

TODO: Finish section.

## Language Integration

When integrating SQL into other languages, there are usually
two choices each with their own drawbacks:

1. Write literal _SQL strings_ into your code. This is
   simple but type safety isn't usually checked till
   runtime.

2. Use an _ORM_. This is more complex and sometimes doesn't
   perfectly model SQL semantics, but does provide type
   safety.

FQL leans towards option #2 by providing a Go API which is
structurally equivalent to the query language, allowing FQL
semantics to be modeled in the host language's type system.

This Go API may also be viewed as an FDB layer which unifies
the directory & tuple layers with the FDB base API.

```lang-go
package example

import (
  "github.com/apple/foundationdb/bindings/go/src/fdb"
  "github.com/apple/foundationdb/bindings/go/src/fdb/directory"

  "github.com/janderland/fdbq/engine"
  "github.com/janderland/fdbq/engine/facade"
  kv "github.com/janderland/fdbq/keyval"
)

func _() {
  fdb.MustAPIVersion(620)
  eg := engine.New(facade.NewTransactor(
    fdb.MustOpenDefault(), directory.Root()))

  // /user/entry(22573,"Goodwin","Samuels")=nil
  query := kv.KeyValue{
    Key: kv.Key{
      Directory: kv.Directory{
        kv.String("user"),
        kv.String("entry"),
      },
      Tuple: kv.Tuple{
        kv.Int(22573),
        kv.String("Goodwin"),
        kv.String("Samuels"),
      },
    },
    Value: kv.Nil{},
  }

  // Perform the write.
  err := eg.Set(query);
  if err != nil {
    panic(err)
  }
}
```

Commit message:

Cleaned up the grammar section.

posts/fql.md, after:

---
title: FQL
...

```lang-fql
/user/index/surname("Johnson",<userID:int>)
/user(:userID,...)
->
/user(9323,"Timothy","Johnson",37)=nil
/user(24335,"Andrew","Johnson",23)=nil
/user(33423,"Ryan","Johnson",54)=nil
```

FQL is a query language for [Foundation
DB](https://www.foundationdb.org/). FQL aims to make FDB's
semantics feel natural and intuitive. Common patterns can be
modeled using FQL. Index indirection and multi-transaction
range reads are first class citizens.

> FQL is a work in-progress. The features mentioned in this
> document are not all implemented. Unimplemented features
> will be marked as such with a callout like this one.

## Introduction

FQL queries look like key-values. They have a key (directory
and tuple), followed by a `=`, and a value. FQL can only
access keys encoded using the directory & tuple
[layers](https://apple.github.io/foundationdb/layer-concept.html).

```lang-fql
/my/directory("my","tuple")=4000
```

FQL queries may define a single key-value to be written, as
shown above, or may define a set of key-values to be read,
as shown below.

```lang-fql
/my/directory("my","tuple")=<>
->
/my/directory("my","tuple")=0x0fa0
```

> `->` is not part of the FQL syntax. It's only used by this
> document to separate a read query from it's exemplary
> results.

The query above has a variable `<>` as it's value. Variables
act as placeholders for any of the supported [data
elements](#data-elements). This query will return a single
key-value from the database, if such a key exists.

FQL queries can also perform range reads by including
a variable in the key's tuple. The query below will return
all key-values which conform to the schema defined by the
query. 

```lang-fql
/my/directory(<>,"tuple")=nil
->
/my/directory("your","tuple")=nil
/my/directory(42,"tuple")=nil
```

All key-values with a certain key prefix can be range read
by ending the key's tuple with `...`.

```lang-fql
/my/directory("my","tuple",...)=<>
->
/my/directory("my","tuple")=0x0fa0
/my/directory("my","tuple",47.3)=0x8f3a
/my/directory("my","tuple",false,0xff9a853c12)=nil
```

A query's value may be omitted to imply a variable, meaning
the following query is semantically identical to the one
above.

```lang-fql
/my/directory("my","tuple",...)
->
/my/directory("my","tuple")=0x0fa0
/my/directory("my","tuple",47.3)=0x8f3a
/my/directory("my","tuple",false,0xff9a853c12)=nil
```

Including a variable in the directory tells FQL to perform
the read on all directory paths matching the schema.

```lang-fql
/<>/directory("my","tuple")
->
/my/directory("my","tuple")=0x0fa0
/your/directory("my","tuple")=nil
```

## Grammar

This section elaborates on the grammar and structure of FQL
queries. FQL is a context-free language with a formal
[definition](https://github.com/janderland/fdbq/blob/main/syntax.ebnf).
For elaborations on what queries mean and how they're
implemented, see [Semantics](#semantics).

### Key-Values

FQL queries are structured like key-values and are written
as a [directory](#Directory), [tuple](#Tuple), `=`, and
value appended together.

```lang-fql
/app/data("server A",0)=0xabcf03
```

The value following the `=` may be any of the [data
elements](#data-elements) or a [variable](#variables).

```lang-fql
/region/north_america(22.3,-8)=("rain","fog")
/region/north_america(22.3,-8)=<tuple|int>
/region/north_america(22.3,-8)=-16
```

The value may also be the `clear` token.

```lang-fql
/some/where("home","town",88.3)=clear
```

### Directories

A directory is specified as a sequence of strings, each
prefixed by a forward slash:

```lang-fql
/my/dir/path_way
```

The strings of the directory do not need quotes if they only
contain alphanumericals, underscores, dashes, or periods. To
use other symbols, the strings must be quoted:

```
/my/"dir@--o/"/path_way
```

The quote character may be backslash escaped:

```
/my/"\"dir\""/path_way
```

### Tuples

A tuple is specified as a sequence of [data
elements](#data-elements) and [variables](#variables),
separated by commas, wrapped in a pair of parenthesis.
Sub-tuples are allowed.

```lang-fql
("one",2,0x03,("subtuple"),5825d3f8-de5b-40c6-ac32-47ea8b98f7b4)
```

The last element of a tuple may be the `...` token.

```lang-fql
(0xff,"thing",...)
```

Any combination of spaces, tabs, and newlines are allowed
after the opening brace and commas. Trailing commas are
allowed.

```lang-fql
(
  1,
  2,
  3,
)
```

### Data Elements

In a FQL query, the directory, tuples, and value contain
instances of data elements. FQL utilizes the same types of
elements as the [tuple
layer](https://github.com/apple/foundationdb/blob/main/design/tuple.md).
Example instances of these types can be seen below.

| Type     | Example                                |
|:---------|:---------------------------------------|
| `nil`    | `nil`                                  |
| `int`    | `-14`                                  |
| `uint`   | `7`                                    |
| `bool`   | `true`                                 |
| `float`  | `33.4`                                 |
| `bigint` | `#35299340192843523485929848293291842` |
| `string` | `"string"`                             |
| `bytes`  | `0xa2bff2438312aac032`                 |
| `uuid`   | `5a5ebefd-2193-47e2-8def-f464fc698e31` |
| `tuple`  | `("hello",27.4,nil)`                   |

> `bigint` support is not yet implemented.

### Variables

Any [data element](#data-elements) may be replaced with
a variable. Variables are specified as a list of data types,
separated by `|`, wrapped in angled braces.

```lang-fql
<uint|string|uuid|bytes>
```

A variable may be empty, including no data types.

```lang-fql
<>
```

## Semantics

Queries have the ability to write a key-value, read one or
more key-values, and list directories.

Queries without any variables result in a single key-value
being written. You can think of these queries as explicitly
defining a single key-value.

Queries with variables or `...` result in zero or more
key-values being read. You can think of these queries as
defining a set of possible key-values stored in the DB.

You can further limit the set of key-values read by
including a type constraint in the variable.

> Queries lacking a value section imply a variable in said
> section and therefore do not result in a write operation.

### Data Encoding

The directory and tuple layers are responsible for 
encoding the data elements in the key section. As for the 
value section, FDB doesn't provide a standard encoding.

The table below outlines how data elements are encoded 
when present in the value section.

| Type     | Encoding                        |
|:---------|:--------------------------------|
| `nil`    | empty value                     |
| `int`    | 64-bit, 1's compliment          |
| `uint`   | 64-bit                          |
| `bool`   | single byte, `0x00` means false |
| `float`  | IEEE 754                        |
| `bigint` | not implemented yet             |
| `string` | ASCII                           |
| `bytes`  | as provided                     |
| `uuid`   | RFC 4122                        |
| `tuple`  | tuple layer                     |

## Index Indirection

TODO: Finish section.

```lang-fql
/user/index/surname("Johnson",<userID:int>)
/user/entry(:userID,...)
```

## Transaction Boundaries

TODO: Finish section.

## Language Integration

When integrating SQL into other languages, there are usually
two choices each with their own drawbacks:

1. Write literal _SQL strings_ into your code. This is
   simple but type safety isn't usually checked till
   runtime.

2. Use an _ORM_. This is more complex and sometimes doesn't
   perfectly model SQL semantics, but does provide type
   safety.

FQL leans towards option #2 by providing a Go API which is
structurally equivalent to the query language, allowing FQL
semantics to be modeled in the host language's type system.

This Go API may also be viewed as an FDB layer which unifies
the directory & tuple layers with the FDB base API.

```lang-go
package example

import (
  "github.com/apple/foundationdb/bindings/go/src/fdb"
  "github.com/apple/foundationdb/bindings/go/src/fdb/directory"

  "github.com/janderland/fdbq/engine"
  "github.com/janderland/fdbq/engine/facade"
  kv "github.com/janderland/fdbq/keyval"
)

func _() {
  fdb.MustAPIVersion(620)
  eg := engine.New(facade.NewTransactor(
    fdb.MustOpenDefault(), directory.Root()))

  // /user/entry(22573,"Goodwin","Samuels")=nil
  query := kv.KeyValue{
    Key: kv.Key{
      Directory: kv.Directory{
        kv.String("user"),
        kv.String("entry"),
      },
      Tuple: kv.Tuple{
        kv.Int(22573),
        kv.String("Goodwin"),
        kv.String("Samuels"),
      },
    },
    Value: kv.Nil{},
  }

  // Perform the write.
  err := eg.Set(query);
  if err != nil {
    panic(err)
  }
}
```
